---
title: My 2019
date: 2019-12-18T15:28:36.217Z
draft: true
tags:
  - programming
  - entrepreneurship
  - freelance
  - Elixir
  - Flutter
  - Electron
categories:
  - longs
  - business
  - development
---
End of 2018 my work life as a full time employee ended. I was not sure nor had
planned what to do in 2019. The initial plan was just to take some time off and
reflect how to proceed.

Right after leaving the office for the time being last time I was eager in
trying out new things on a technical level. In the second half I was
investgating new programming languages in order to make more complex domains
easier to grasp. I read a bit about Elixir, Elm and other functional languages.
A co-worker also supplied me with ideas and material as he also did some things
outside the PHP world we were working in.

At the same time a former colleague contacted me with an idea of starting a
product. The idea sounded appealing. It was again a new domain, it was something
that might help other people living a more healthy life.

We discussed how we can make this maybe something bigger. My colleague was
already experienced when it comes to building a startup. We went this way for
a couple of weeks with pitching the idea to VCs and checking the market. This
was the first big learning in 2019 for me. I looked into how VC funded companies
work, how shares are best established, about dilution, investment stages like
pre-seed, seed, series A - Z. Also were to found an entity and what all comes
with this. A very interesting and absolute new experience for me. I was never
a sort of business guy but now I had to look into that.

Besides the business part we also started implementing a prototype. Or two to be
more concise. We needed a backoffice app and wanted to have mobile apps for the
users. As mentioned above I looked into functional programming and this was the
perfect project to start with it. For the backoffice application I decided to go
with Elixir as I had read already one book about it at that time and felt like
going with it. The mobile app was started with Flutter which was pre-1.0 at that
time but already pretty mature for what we needed to support.

The implementation of the prototypes went very well. The business model
development was also on its way and my colleague was looking into angel
investors and VCs to check what might be our possibilies.

Apart from that we both decided to apply for a Gründungszuschuss which is a
German thing were you get some money while starting your business. This
requires to have a business plan written and some calculation to prove that it
makes sense and is lucrative enough to afford your live with it.



