---
title: State of mail clients 2019/20
date: 2020-01-04T10:55:07.071Z
draft: true
tags:
  - ramblings
  - macOS
  - iOS
  - thoughts
  - mail programs
categories:
  - longs
  - software
---

So mailing is a basic need for almost every user of computers. It's the basic
form of communication for decades now. The standards and protocols are mature and known.
Mail is not perfect and there might be subtle flaws and shortcomings. Overall I
would say it is a known domain with little unexpected things.

The server side of things will be disregarded but I know there is fairly stable
and reliable software out there. Let's rather have a look at the client software.

## Apple Mail

This comes bundled with either iOS or macOS. As a lot of Apple's bundled software
it once was a big move but then started to stagnate in development. This is not
per se a bad thing if the software works.

From my PoV it does work overall. But I noticed some annoyances on the current
version of macOS that started to bug me hard. From time to time the app pops up
and gains focus. It turned out that there are issues in connecting to Google Mail
servers which seem to timeout from time to time (from the PoV of Apple Mail that
is). This becomes even more annoying if you are working fullscreen in an app and
suddenly you get a split screen and wonder what happened. Of course you completely
loose focus. I wasn't able to turn off this behavior. Maybe it would be better
to trigger a notification instead as I can take care to not care right now but
know that there is something off.

Another thing Apple Mail was still not able to provide is a clean plugin
interface. There is PGP Mail and Mailbutler for instance that offer plugins but
break in every iteration of the application and have to adapted.

The UI is dated but is also well understood. If you have multiple accounts it
tends to get a bit confusing though.

The search is OK but could also be improved.

Features like rules and junk mail seem to me like a blast from the past as
normally this will be done server side nowadays. But that can only be me. It
would be awesome though if the server side filter etc. could be incorporated.
But that might not be feasible as many companies use sub-standards and AFAIK
this is not even standardized.

There is no push support which might be a bit outdated but as mails are async
by their nature it's fine. Less notifications less distraction.

To summarize: The biggest annoyance is the popping up and the sometimes going
stale of Apple Mail.

## Thunderbird

I think Thunderbird still exists but there have been rumors that it's only
maintained but not developed any more. I'm unsure about the current state but
think it might still be under development (again?). I used it back some years
but lost track because it didn't fit my needs and was very resource hungry.

## Postbox

Postbox when they first launched showed a way to have the solid foundation of
Thunderbird with a more adapted look and feel towards macOS (OSX at that time).
It was a fresh take on tackling emails. F.e. it supports the Gmail keyboard shortcuts
that come very handy. It also has quick filter (Focus Pane) where you can filter
by certain attributes like attachments etc.

The memory footprint can be an issue though. Apple Mail has a memory usage of
60MB where Postbox has at least 350MB which is 5x higher.

I also noticed that there are crashes after Postbox runs for a while. There are
many patches and updates so that might get less but it kept happening regularly
for me.

What I didn't get was the from my PoV useless additions they put into their
software like f.e. topics. These are only for the current client instance. This
is neither a standard nor anything that can be synced anywhere. This will get
lost once you reinstall the application and also will not be available on any
mobile devices (the new shit you know). That's for me only lost love. But there
might be people using it heavily as the idea per se is not bad. Just the implementation
lacks sense to me.

Another great thing though is (was, is again) that there is a plugin system. It
has been diabled as Thunderbird removed it and Postbox is based on Thunderbird.
They added it back though and it is possible to have e.g. PGP back aboard. The
new extension system is very restricted though but there are not all too many
things (nothing besides PGP TBH) I need.

To summarize: Postbox is good software. Unfortunately they do not offer a mobile
app. This means all you signatures etc. need be manually ported to the mobile
app you select for this.

## Canary mail

Canary mail's mission is to make mail privacy easy without inventing the wheel.

I had it monitored for quite some time and was really curious as the interface
looked slick and it supported PGP for desktop *and* mobile. The reviews were little
but good overall.

When I then wanted to jump on the train and buy it it turned out that they were
preparing a complete rewrite and were currently in the beta phase. I installed
their iOS version and was quite happy. The PGP setup is a bit weird as it
automatically creates new keys and you have to replace those with your own. The
restrictions on iOS make this not so exremly straightforward as the import of
an existing key is... cumbersome.

So far the beta was OK'ish. The development process is Slack driven where I'm
not sure how good that is. But it is a quick feedback channel so if it works
for the developers it's OK. Speaking of developers I am still not sure if it's
more than one which is a big bus factor and explains the stuggles I saw.

After the beta was progressing they released the iOS app with a new pricing
scheme. From my PoV it was and still is an advanced beta version as there are
a lot of crashes and glitches like not rendering the emails at all. You have
to reset / quit the app and restart it. They offer a cross-device sync that is
not working etc. There is a lot of things that need to be addressed.

After that they told via Slack that the macOS beta was underway. It was a quick
development that resulted in the same quality the iOS app offered. It works
most of the time somewhat.

As written before I think that this is only one person working on it and the
topic of mail with PGP might be too much for one individual.

I bought the software and hope they can address all these issues at some point.
Currently the software is not usable.

Besides that they also implemented features not many people need like f.e.
favorites. It is not yet possible to deactivate it and it is an empty list for
me with a switch in the UI I can't just hide.

A very weird feature is that you can pin *and* star messages. I did not yet find
out what the use of stars is. Pin seems to be the flag feature in Apple Mail.

To summarize: The software is promising but currently unusable for daily use.

## Airmail

Once Airmail was the nicest mail app on iOS. They also added a macOS companion
that even supported PGP via a plugin system. They iterated quickly and the
software did it's work besides some smaller issues which I hoped getting addressed
quickly.

At some point I felt they just stopped developing the apps altogether. There
were some bugfixes from time to time but no activity compared to the beginnings.

In the last year or so they then switched to a subscription model and capped
a lot of features resulting in 2 star ratings and (maybe exaggerated) the death
of the apps.

To summarize: Airmail was screwed up by their own development team.

## Spark

The team of readdle created a lot of productivity apps like calendars which was
a great app (still is I think) before jumping on the train for mail apps.

The first launch was like a revelation. It was a mail app that seemed to
effortlessly take the crown that Airmail once wore. It was clean, responsive and
beautiful. And it was for free. It was advertised to help you with machine
learning and so on.

But there was a cost for the user. All mail and credentials needed to be
transferred to their servers to enable the features. This comes at the cost of
privacy. Readdle adapted their ToS and privacy statements that this is clear.
So they do not trick you into it but you have to buy this in order to use the
software. All in or nothing.

Of course also Readdle couldn't just make a good mail program (which still does
not exist to my knowledge) without putting useless stuff on top. They added
team email where you can share mails within your team. This is the way they want
to monetize and that's fair enough. The feature leaks here and there into the
otherwise so brilliantly and clean mail experience.

What bugged me the most was that it is not easy to find out where Readdle has
their headquarters (on their homepage there is no address). Wikipedia and
their job postings suggest that they are based in Odessa, Ukraine. But that
point of not having an address on their homepage (maybe I overlooked it)
compined with having to read (automated) all the emails and having access to
your mail accounts does not drive trust all too much for me. Again I do not say
they have bad intentions it just feels a weird to me.

## Summary

I also tried a lot of other mail programs, like Outlook etc. Those also have
their shortcomings in one way or the other. It is to date nothing available that
combines simple email with multiple platforms (or only the Apple ecosystem for
that matter). All the apps have downsides that might be caused by too wide
focus. Of course it's clear that only email does not seem to pay off. The good
thing is though that with all these attempts the bounds of the standard of email
is challenged. This is a good thing.

What I would like to have is in summary a mail client that supports the big
companies (Gmail, iCloud, Outlook) with their sub-standards like labels and
custom IMAP / POP. The only really advanced features I like is something like
quick unsubscribe, go to Github issue and things like this that could be
parsed client side. Another neat feature is a suggestion when you move mail.
This can also be done (learned if you will) on the client side. Push is nice
but not a blocker.

But this is only what I want and I know a lot of other people will disagree or
simply want more features. This is why there are so many different clients with
different approaches.
